# [Handling Databases](https://www.arangodb.com/docs/stable/data-modeling-databases.html)

This is an introduction to managing databases in ArangoDB from within JavaScript.

When you have an established connection to ArangoDB,
the current database can be changed explicitly using the *db._useDatabase()* method. 

- [ArangoDB - Database Methods](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/arangodb/arangodb_database_methods.htm)

This will switch to the specified database (provided it exists and the user can connect to it).
From this point on,
any following action in the same shell or connection will use the specified database, unless otherwise specified.

*Note*:
If the database is changed, client drivers need to store the current database name on their side, too.
This is because connections in ArangoDB do not contain any state information.
All state information is contained in the HTTP request/response data.

To connect to a specific database after arangosh has started use the command described above.
It is also possible to specify a database name when invoking arangosh.
For this purpose, use the command-line parameter *--server.database*, e.g.

    > arangosh --server.database test

Please note that commands, actions, scripts or AQL queries should never access multiple databases, even if they exist.
The only intended and supported way in ArangoDB is to use one database at a time for a command,
an action, a script or a query.

Operations started in one database must not switch the database later and continue operating in another.

## Working with Databases

### Database Methods

The following methods are available to manage databases via JavaScript.
Please note that several of these methods can be used from the **_system** database only.

#### Name

return the database name
`db._name()`

Returns the name of the current database as a string.

**Examples**

    arangosh> require("@arangodb").db._name();
    _system

#### ID

return the database id
`db._id()`

Returns the id of the current database as a string.

**Examples**

    arangosh> require("@arangodb").db._id();
    1

#### Path

return the path to database files
`db._path()`

Returns the filesystem path of the current database as a string.

**Examples**

    arangosh> require("@arangodb").db._path();
    /tmp/arangosh_CFBjlI/rocksdb-clusterOrNot/data

#### isSystem

return the database type
`db._isSystem()`

Returns whether the currently used database is the *_system* database.
The system database has some special privileges and properties, for example,
database management operations such as create or drop can only be executed
from within this database. Additionally, the *_system* database itself
cannot be dropped.

#### Use Database

change the current database
`db._useDatabase(name)`

Changes the current database to the database specified by *name*. Note
that the database specified by *name* must already exist.

Changing the database might be disallowed in some contexts, for example
server-side actions (including Foxx).

When performing this command from arangosh, the current credentials (username
and password) will be re-used. These credentials might not be valid to
connect to the database specified by *name*. Additionally, the database
only be accessed from certain endpoints only. In this case, switching the
database might not work, and the connection / session should be closed and
restarted with different username and password credentials and/or
endpoint data.

#### List Databases

return the list of all existing databases
`db._databases()`

Returns the list of all databases. This method can only be used from within
the *_system* database.

#### Create Database

create a new database
`db._createDatabase(name, options, users)`

Creates a new database with the name specified by *name*.
There are restrictions for database names
(see [DatabaseNames](data-modeling-naming-conventions-database-names.html)).

Note that even if the database is created successfully, there will be no
change into the current database to the new database. Changing the current
database must explicitly be requested by using the
*db._useDatabase* method.

The *options* attribute currently has no meaning and is reserved for
future use.

The optional *users* attribute can be used to create initial users for
the new database. If specified, it must be a list of user objects. Each user
object can contain the following attributes:

* *username*: the user name as a string. This attribute is mandatory.
* *passwd*: the user password as a string. If not specified, then it defaults
  to an empty string.
* *active*: a boolean flag indicating whether the user account should be
  active or not. The default value is *true*.
* *extra*: an optional JSON object with extra user information. The data
  contained in *extra* will be stored for the user but not be interpreted
  further by ArangoDB.

If no initial users are specified, a default user *root* will be created
with an empty string password. This ensures that the new database will be
accessible via HTTP after it is created.

You can create users in a database if no initial user is specified. Switch
into the new database (username and password must be identical to the current
session) and add or modify users with the following commands.

```js
  require("@arangodb/users").save(username, password, true);
  require("@arangodb/users").update(username, password, true);
  require("@arangodb/users").remove(username);
```
Alternatively, you can specify user data directly. For example:

```js
  db._createDatabase("newDB", {}, [{ username: "newUser", passwd: "123456", active: true}])
```

Those methods can only be used from within the *_system* database.

#### Drop Database

drop an existing database
`db._dropDatabase(name)`

Drops the database specified by *name*.
The database specified by *name* must exist.

**Note**: Dropping databases is only possible from within the *_system*
database. The *_system* database itself cannot be dropped.

Databases are dropped asynchronously, and will be physically removed if
all clients have disconnected and references have been garbage-collected.

#### Engine

retrieve the storage engine type used by the server
`db._engine()`

Returns the name of the storage engine in use (`mmfiles` or `rocksdb`), as well
as a list of supported features (types of indexes and
[dfdb](programs-arango-dfdb.html)).

#### Engine statistics

retrieve statistics related to the storage engine (rocksdb)
`db._engineStats()`

Returns some statistics related to the storage engine activity, including figures
about data size, cache usage, etc.

**Note**: Currently this only produces useful output for the RocksDB engine.

## Notes about Databases

Please keep in mind that each database contains its own system collections,
which need to be set up when a database is created. This will make the creation
of a database take a while.

Replication is either configured on a
[per-database level](administration-master-slave-database-setup.html)
or on [server level](administration-master-slave-server-level-setup.html).
In a per-database setup, any replication logging or applying for a new database
must be configured explicitly after a new database has been created, whereas all
databases are automatically replicated in case of the server-level setup using the global replication applier.

Foxx applications
are also available only in the context of the database they have been installed 
in. A new database will only provide access to the system applications shipped
with ArangoDB (that is the web interface at the moment) and no other Foxx
applications until they are explicitly installed for the particular database.
